In this lecture, you'll learn about how to configure port security to prevent unauthorized devices
like switches and wireless access points on your network. And we'll use a lab demo to show this.
So I've got packet tracer open here.
I got Switch1 with a couple of PCs plugged in. PC1 and PC2. They've got IP addresses 10.10.10.10
and 10.10.10.11.
They're on ports fa0/1 and fa0/2. Ignore PC3 for now.
That's the villain that's going to show up in a minute.
I guess if I have a look at my config on Switch1, I don't have any configuration on here yet.
I've just added a hostname and I've also configured spanning-tree portfast on all the ports just
so it'll come up quicker so you can see what's going on more quickly.
And what I'm going to do here is I got a global config and then on all of my interfaces, the end hosts
are going to be plugged in.
So that would be interface range fa0/1 - 24.
I'm going to say switchport port-security
and that is going to give me an error message, because I can't put it on a
port which is a dynamic port. I need to configure them as access ports first.
So I've still got the range selected. So I can say switchport mode access to make them access ports
and then I can try the command again, switchport port-security
and it takes the command now.
So I haven't added any parameters. Let's just have all of the default settings.
So let's have a look and see what that does.
So I will do a
show
port-security interface fa0/1. We're all going to have the same config and you can
see that the maximum MAC addresses allowed is one. And if there's a violation, the port is going to be
shutdown.
So right now, I've only got one host plugged in to any port so the port shouldn't get
They should have connectivity to each other. Let's check that. I'm going to PC2 and I'll ping PC1
at 10.10.10.10,
and the ping works just fine.
OK, so when you've got the network set up as normal with just one end host plugged into your ports, then
everything is going to work
OK. If I go back to the packet tracer
front end again, and let's say that in the part of the building where PC2 is, they've hired some
additional staff there and there's not enough wall ports.
So what we should do is get in touch with the IT department and say, "Can you put some more wall ports in,
please?"
But you know what?
Sometimes users do things that they shouldn't do and take things in their own hands. So let's say that the users
down here, what they do is that they removed the cable connected to PC2. So let's take that out.
And then so that they can get additional hosts plugged in there, they add an additional switch in
that part of the network. So they put a switch in here and then the cable. The host that was there already,
they cable that into the switch.
And the new host, they cabled that into the switch as well. And then,
they've still got the network cable that was plugged into PC2 before that they know was alive on
the network, so they plug that into the switch.
So that was on fa0/2 on our Switch1 and they plug that into their new switch.
And you think, great, we've got all of our new hosts are on the network now. But if we go on to PC3
and from PC3, we ping 10.10.10.10,
the ping is going to fail because port security on Switch1 sees that as an additional MAC address. There's now
two MAC addresses trying to send traffic into
fa0/2, it's going to shut the port down.
Let's verify that by going on to Switch2 again.
And I will do the same command again.
show port-security interface fa0/1. Notice before the status was Secure-up and there was
no violation.
Now,
I can see that, oh, I'm looking at the wrong port. I'm looking at fa0/1.
Fa0/2 would be exactly the same as that.
So let's go on to the correct one, which is fa0/2 and here, before, it was Secure-up.
Now I can see that it is Secure-shutdown, because there is a security violation.
And if I do a show ip interface brief, I can see that it is showing as down/down on here now.
OK, so to get the interface back up again, I need to remove the offending host.
So the reason we've done this now is that the port is going to be down.
The users are going to get in touch with IT and say, hey, they won't tell you what they did.
So you're going to hear about it now anyway, because they've lost connectivity
in that part of the network, so you will discover this.
You'll go down there.
If the switch, if the rogue switch is still plugged in, then you will go and cable everything back as
it was.
Possibly the users will have set things back anyway.
So let's have a look.
So back when you're, let's say you go down there and the users haven't fixed anything, they left it as is.
So we need to set things back as they were.
So we're going to remove that rogue switch and then cable fa0/2 back into PC2 as it was originally.
We'll also get a new wall port in that part of the building so that we can also cable Switch1 into
PC3 as well.
Now, at this point, PC3 was put into interface fa0/3, which is not shutdown.
So if I go into PC3 now and ping 10.10.10.10, this ping is going to work
OK. But if I go back on to PC2 and they were able to ping 10.10.10.10 before
they start messing with the network, if I try pinging now, it still won't work because the interface
is still err-disabled. To bring the interface back up again,
an administrator has to go on the switch and go on to that interface,
toggle config t, interface fa0/2, do a shutdown and then a
no shutdown.
And that will bring the interface back into service, so if I now do a show port-security interface fa0/2,
I can see that it is back to Secure-up again now. And a show ip interface brief,
I can see that it is being back to up/up.
So now if I go back onto my host, which was PC2 and try pinging again, the ping works again.
OK, so that was port security and how we can use it to stop users putting unauthorized wireless access
points and switches onto the network.